=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

adduser-novaboot - create user account for use with novaboot's --ssh option

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<adduser-novaboot> --key KEY [--admin-id NAME] [adduser options] user

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<adduser-novaboot> is a wrapper of L<adduser(8)> command that
simplifies creation of user accounts for I<novaboot>'s --ssh option.
The created account has its shell set to L<novaboot-shell(1)>. The
command also creates a template of the configuration file, sets up
administrator's SSH key in L<authorized_keys(5)> prepares directories
and symlinks that for integration with TFTP server.

=head2 Automatic power-off

When your system uses L<systemd(1)>, you can configure a systemd
service to automatically power-off the target after timeout. To enable
this run:

    systemctl --user enable novaboot-delayed-power-off

as the created user (e.g. via shell subcommand). To enable delayed
power-off for all novaboot-shell account, run the follwing as root:

    systemctl --global enable novaboot-delayed-power-off

Individual accounts may disable this global configuration by running:

    systemctl --user mask novaboot-delayed-power-off

The power-off timeout is hardcoded in the B<novaboot-power-off@.timer>
unit. To override the timeout, run C<systemctl edit
novaboot-power-off@TARGET.timer> for your B<TARGET> and insert the
following to the spawned editor:

    [Timer]
    OnActiveSec=30min

=head1 OPTIONS

=over 8

=item --key KEY

Mandatory argument specifying administrator's public SSH key (e.g.
F<~/.ssh/id_rsa.pub>). The key will be copied to the created account's
F<~/.ssh/authorized_keys> and marked with administrator flag.

=item --admin-id NAME

User name associated with the key. This user name is shown to
connecting users when the target is occupied by the administrator.
When omitted, I<admin> is used as the user name.

=back

=head1 AUTHORS

Michal Sojka <sojkam1@fel.cvut.cz>

Latest version can be found at
L<https://github.com/wentasah/novaboot>.

=cut
